The social contract, exemplified by the relationship between the taxpayer and the SA Revenue Service, has been broken by the government. Judge Dennis Davis, in passing (Cover Story/On My Mind, January 21-27), mentions corruption but fails to acknowledge that the state, by its own admission, is not competent to deliver the services that it should provide with tax money. Our road, port, rail, sewerage, electricity and water networks are in a state of collapse, and no civil servant has lost a job, had a reduction in pay or even nominally been held to account for this abject failure. The private sector has been ravaged by the incoherent government response to Covid-19, while not a single government employee has suffered financial penalty. Is the first solution to the income deficit to place a further burden on the taxpayer? Davis anecdotally refers to exotic motor vehicles and multiple homes as corroborating evidence of tax avoidance, even evasion. He notes the paucity in the number of taxpayers in the top tax bracket. Besides the obvious fact that one needs to consider the net value of these assets after debt, Davis also conveniently ignores the fact that entrepreneurs seldom draw salaries and, when risk is rewarded, they earn dividends, so would not pay PAYE tax. An entrepreneur’s business will pay 28% income tax and 20% dividend tax on any distribution (48% in total). So while such entrepreneurs may not be personally categorised in the top tax bracket, they would certainly always pay their fair share. Not to mention that they create jobs. One would usually find executives of large conglomerates populating the higher-earnings brackets. But, given the hostile business environment, these jobs are in short supply as local businesses downsize and multinationals announce they will invest no more. Ultimately a tax revolt might be the only option left, as the ballot box has proved an inadequate forum to hold the political elite to account for their incompetence and the disdain with which they treat the country’s citizens. Where else could taxpaying citizens go for satisfaction for this clear breach of contract? Warwick van BredaJoburg The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za