It wouldn’t be “Super Mario” Draghi, the former European Central Bank (ECB) governor who has now been roped into Italy’s perpetually chaotic politics to try to form a government. Draghi is highly respected in Europe for his tenure at the central bank. However, placating the notoriously thrifty Germans regarding the Eurozone’s easy-money policy (“We will do whatever it takes” to save the Euro, he said, famously, in 2012) is surely an easier gig than trying to corral Italy’s unwieldy political parties into something approaching a team. He’ll have to contend with the Five Star Movement (started by comedian Beppe Grillo in 2009) which, writes Bloomberg, “risks splintering over whether to support him, while far-right leader Giorgia Meloni has called for snap elections. Matteo Salvini’s League is lukewarm, and even the moderate Democrats have reservations.” Nonetheless, Bloomberg considers him the best person for the worst job. As it writes in this article: “There are many reasons for skepticism: The nation is in the middle of a health and economic crisis. So are most places right now, but Italy is one of the most fragile members of the European Union because of its meagre growth and towering public debt.” If anyone can do it, Bloomberg judges that  Mario can. Well, maybe … How many governments has Italy had since 1945? Oh yes: 66. An average of one every 1.14 years. But good luck to him, I say. The Amazon revolution The really big leadership change, however, is Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos’s move to the role of executive chair in the third quarter of the year. As one wag on Twitter put it yesterday: “Who leaves a job in this economy?” But Bezos is synonymous with the geeky online bookstore he  has built into a truly colossal multinational superpower. As the Financial Times (FT) writes in this comprehensive look  at Amazon’s changing of the guard, in the quarter century that Bezos has headed Amazon “he became arguably the most successful businessman of his generation, building a company worth $1.7-trillion, employing 1.3m people and turning more than half of US adults into Amazon Prime subscribers, according to analysts’ estimates”. It goes further, though: “Bezos redefined both the retail and the computing industries and can take credit for ushering in innovations in logistics, robotics, mobile technology and artificial intelligence. In the process, he built a personal fortune approaching $200bn” the FT writes. Andy Jassy, who heads  Amazon’s cloud computing division, Amazon Web Services (AWS),   succeeds Bezos. AWS is arguably the heart of Amazon’s recent success, as evidenced by its latest results. For the year to January AWS reported sales of $45.3bn, a 29.5% increase from 2019. Amazon has become a truly astonishing powerhouse. Consider that in just the three months to the end of December it made $125.56bn — its biggest quarterly sales haul ever. Bezos will now focus on “new products”, namely  the Bezos Earth Fund and The Washington Post. In a note to staff, he  writes: “If you do it right, a few years after a surprising invention, the new thing has become normal. People yawn. That yawn is the greatest compliment an inventor can receive.” Not everyone is charmed. Robert Reich, the former secretary of labour in previous US president Bill Clinton’s administration,  wrote on Twitter  yesterday: “Jeff Bezos added $68.6bn to his wealth since March — a 61% wealth increase. Meanwhile, an estimated 20,000 Amazon workers have been infected with Covid-19. [And they get] no hazard pay, paid sick leave, or adequate protection. Capitalism is off the rails.” Now that the Democrats are in the driving seat in Washington, Big Tech will undoubtedly attract far more regulatory scrutiny. But whether it’s Amazon, or Google’s parent Alphabet (which also released staggeringly good results this week), betting against these firms seems to be as foolish as the Harvard Business School student who, according to  Brad Stone’s book on Amazon, told Bezos back in 1997: “You seem like a really nice guy, so don’t take this the wrong way, but you really need to sell to Barnes and Noble and get out now.” *Talevi is the FM's Money & Investing editor.