Ace Magashule attempted to suspend President Cyril Ramaphosa from the ANC in “vengeful retaliation” for his own suspension by the party, ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte says in an affidavit responding to Magashule’s court bid to have him reinstated to his post. The ANC has taken a hardline stance against Magashule, on Monday initiating a disciplinary process against him after he defied his suspension conditions through mobilising support and addressing party meetings. The ANC’s national working committee asked a presenter to investigate potential disciplinary charges against him, which will then be taken to the party’s national disciplinary committee for further processing. In the meantime, Magashule remains suspended and is fighting that suspension in court. He applied to the High Court to have his suspension set aside and to have his own suspension of Ramaphosa upheld by the court. Magashule was given 30 days to step aside due the corruption charges he faced but did not do so. He was therefore suspended in line with the ANC constitution, but refused to accept his suspension and instead penned a letter suspending Ramaphosa and publicly announced that he was doing so. In her response to his High Court application on behalf of the ANC and on her own behalf, Duarte — who signed Magashule’s suspension letter after an instruction from the party’s NWC — said Magashule had “trivialised” the criminal charges he faced in his court application. She describes the charges of fraud, corruption and money laundering related to a R255m Free State asbestos contract against Magashule as “serious”, saying his assertion that the charges were “frivolous” was untrue and if the charges against him were proven, he would be deemed unfit to lead in the ANC. She adds that there is no “crisis” in the country or “economic instability” caused by Magashule’s suspension from the party, as it is a matter relating to an individual. “This is a matter of an individual and does not involve the country or its economic stability,” she says. She also says that the “step aside” rule was not punitive in nature — but rather “preventive” which intended to allow the accused time and space to defend themselves against criminal charges and spare the image of the ANC. “(It is) designed to serve the best interests of the ANC, by suspending people whose integrity has been cast in doubt, pending a process that follows in court proceedings,” she says. Addressing another of Magashule’s allegations that the ANC’s constitution has violated the rights he has under the SA constitution, she says: “The ANC’s constitution is also not inconsistent with the national constitution. “It is a private contract between the members of the ANC. The powers it confers on the ANC structures and officials are contractual powers and not public powers.” Duarte also pours cold water on Magashule’s allegation that his suspension is part of a “purge” by Ramaphosa and his backers of all those who did not support him at Nasrec. She denies that the step aside rule is factional and says that many others have stepped aside — even though they supported Ramaphosa at Nasrec. Interestingly, Duarte also dispels another nugget of misinformation spread widely by Magashule backers — she says he does not have a right to appeal his suspension, repeating that this is so because it is not punitive in nature but rather preventive. Meanwhile, Magashule again appeared in support of former president Jacob Zuma outside the Pietermaritzburg Magistrates Court, but this time around, he toned down his defiant rhetoric. He kept his address short and said he was not hijacking the platform to support his own cause, but was rather there to support Zuma. This was after Zuma had chastised Magashule and his backers at his last court appearance two weeks ago for using the platform to fight their own battles with the ANC. It is an early sign of cracks in the embattled faction of the ANC composed of those who enabled and participated in the capture or the state and grand corruption under Zuma’s tenure.